# AMWA BCP-XXX-YY: EDID Mapping in NMOS Systems \[Work In Progress\]


## Background

AMWA NMOS specifications provide resources for specifying receiver capabilities of an NMOS device.  Recent extension of these resources allow NMOS Controllers developed for PRO A/V User-Stories to be created.  In particular, these NMOS Controllers include Controllers developed for the AIMS sponsered IPMX set of open standards [IPMX](#ipmx-ref). 

## Scope

This document provides Best Current Practice guideluines for how to implement mappings of EDID elements onto AMWA IS-04 and IS-EDID-CM resources.  The document also provides guidance on how implementers may use the APIs to achieve some common IPMX type User-Stories and associated use-cases as described in the EDID Connection Management Architecture [EDID-CM-ARCH](#edid-cm-arch-ref).

## Use of Normative Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](#rfc2119-ref).

## Definitions

_See also the [NMOS Glossary](https://github.com/AMWA-TV/nmos/wiki/Glossary), and definitions within RFCs._


### IPMX 
  The IPMX (Internet Protocol for Media Experience) is a set of open standards and specifications to enable the carriage of compressed and uncompressed video, audio and data over IP networks. It includes provisions for control, copy protection, connection management and security. Includes use of SMPTE and NMOS standards.


### IPMX Controller
  An IPMX Controller is a type of NMOS Controller analogous to an NMOS Broadcast Controller. The IPMX Controller is at the application layer of the NMOS Architecuture and makes use of IPMX APIs including AMWA NMOS APIs. Further information can be found in [EDID-CM-ARCH](#edid-cm-arch-ref).  

### EDID 
  Extended Display Identification Data (EDID) is a metadata format for display devices to describe their capabilities to a video source (e.g. graphics card or set-top box). The data format is defined by a standard published by the Video Electronics Standards Association (VESA).  For purposes of this BCP, EDID definitions are taken from the E-EDID version 1.4 [E-EDID](#edid-ref).

## Mapping from EDID to NMOS Resources

This section is broken down into several subsections that describe recommendations for mapping parts of a target display device's EDID to NMOS Resources.  The following subsections are provided:

- Mapping of EDID to IS-04 Receiver Caps 
   - Video Mappings from EDID to IS-04 Receiver Caps
   - Audio Mappings from EDID to IS-04 Receiver Caps
- Mapping of EDID to IS-EDID-CM
   - EDID to IS-EDID-CM Destination Resource
   - EDID to Essential Media Capabilities
   - EDID to Raw EDID Format

### Constuction of IS-04 Receiver Caps

This section describes how a display device's capabilities (video and audio) as described by its EDID is mapped by an implementation to the NMOS device's [IS-04](#is-04-ref) Receiver Capabilities.  

#### Video and AUdio Mappings

The following refers to the NMOS Receiver Capabilities Best Current Practices [BCP-004-01](#bcp-004-01-ref). Paremeter values used are taken from the NMOS Capabilities Parameter Register [NMOS-CAP-REG](#nmos-cap-reg-ref)

##### Video Mappings

In order that a NMOS device that provides IS-04 Receivers can work with EDID type video devices the device:

- MUST create one IS-04 Video Receiver for each of the displays associated with the IS-04 Device

- MUST set the `format` element to the value `urn:x-nmos:format:video`  

- MUST associate with each IS-04 Receiver a `contraints_set` resource in the IS-04 Receiver's `caps` resource  as described in [BCP-004-1]

- MUST map at least one of the video modes present by the display device's EDID into the created `contraint_set` with the following elements set:

  - `urn:x-nmos:cap:meta:enabled` set to `true`.  

  - `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:grain_rate` set to the refresh rate as taken from the EDID's preferred timing mode for the supported video format. 

  - `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:frame_width` set to the video frame width as taken from the EDID preferred timing mode.

  - `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:frame_height` set to the video frame height as taken from the EDID preferred timing mode.

  - `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:interlace_mode` set to the interlace mode as taken from the EDID standart time block for this supported video mode.

  - `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:colorspace` set to the colorspace indicated in the EDID Feature Support byte.

  - `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:color_sampling` set to the set to the color sampling indicated in the EDID Feature Support byte.

  - `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:component_depth` set to the color bit depth field of the EDID's Video Input definition.

- MUST map the following elements if present in the EDID

  - `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:transfer_characteristic` set to the HDR capabilities of the monitor if the EDID contains the optional HDR metadata block.

  - `urn:x-nmos:cap:meta:preference` 
    - set to 100 if the video mode is a preferred mode.  
    - set to -100 if the video mode is a non-native mode.  
    - set to 0 all others  

- MUST not add a `contraints_set` for any video mode the device cannot support due to implementation limitations even though the display supports the mode.

- MUST add a grouping tag to the created video receiver with tag `name` and `role` set to indicate a group comprised of the video receiver and audio receiver associated with the display.

- SHOULD provide a `contraint_sets` entry for each of the video modes supported by the display as provided by the EDID as an individual `contraint_set`on the receiver with parameters set as described above if the mode is supported by the NMOS device.

##### Audio Mappings

In order that a NMOS device that provides Audio Receivers can work with EDID type audio devices the device:

- MUST create one IS-04 Audio Receiver for each of the displays associated with the IS-04 Device that support audio.

- MUST set the `format` element to the value `urn:x-nmos:format:audio`  

- MUST associate with each IS-04 Audio Receiver a `contraints_set` resource in the IS-04 Receiver's `caps` resource  as described in [BCP-004-1]

- MUST map at least one of the audio modes present by the display device's EDID into a `contraint_set` with the following elements set:

  - `urn:x-nmos:cap:meta:enabled` set to `true`.  

  - `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:channel_count` set to number of audio channels as taken from EDID's CEA-861-EXTENSION-Block's Audio Data element.

  - `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:channel_count` set to number of audio channels as taken from EDID's CEA-861-EXTENSION-Block's Audio Data element.

  - `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:sample_rate` set to array of supported sample rates as taken from EDID's CEA-861-EXTENSION-Block's Audio Data element.

  - `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:sample_depth` set to array of supported sampling bit rates as taken from EDID's CEA-861-EXTENSION-Block's Audio Data element.

- MUST add a grouping tag to the created audio receiver with tag `name` and `role` set to indicate a group comprised of the video receiver and audio receiver associated with the display.

- SHOULD provide a `contraint_sets` entry for each of the audio modes supported by the display as provided by the EDID as an individual `contraint_set`with parameters set as above.

### EDID to NMOS IS-EDID-CM Resource

IS-EDID-CM provides an API for the IS-04 EDID Device Control.  The following items apply to an NMOS device that has EDID type displays:

- MUST maintain a binary representation of the EDID for each display and support GET for the endpoint `edid-cm\receiver-id\edid` where receiver-id is the IS-04 UUID for the receiver.

- For each Receiver 
- MUST populate the `edid-cm\destination` resource with the following parameters:

  - `manufacturer` set to the manufacturer name taken from the display's EDID.

  - `model` set to the model taken from the display's EDID.
  
  - `serial_number` set to the serial number taken from the display's EDID.
  
  - `max_image_size` Height and width set to the maximum image size taken from the display's EDID.
  
  - `monitor_name` taken from the EDID.

### IPMX Controller

The following best practices apply to an IPMX Controller:

- MUST implement all User-Stories as described in the IPMX Architecture document [EDID-CM-ARCH](#edid-cm-arch-ref). 

- MUST use the API specified by [EDID-CM](#edid-cm) in a way consistent with Sequence Diagrams provided the in the architecture document to realize the IPMX Architecture User Stories.

- MAY be implemented as either a centralized controller or as a peer-to-peer controller.

- MUST work consistently with NMOS devices that do not implement this IPMX BCP recommendations (e.g. all [IS-04](#is-04-ref), [IS-5](#is-05-ref) etc work for devices that do not provide the EDID Control)

For a peer-to-peer implementation an IPMX Controller:

- SHOULD provide an implementation of the [EDID-CM](#edid-cm-ref) endpoints for  retrieval by an external user.

### Media Formats

The following apply for choice of media formats for IPMX devices:

- SHOULD use [JPEG-XS](#jpeg-xs-ref) for video compression and decompression. 

- MAY use other codecs but be aware that JPEG-XS will provide best fit for IPMX.

- MUST follow the specfication provided in the SDP section of the [JPEG-XS](#jpeg-xs) specification when using JPEG-XS as transport when using SDP for NMOS Connection Management [IS-05](#is-05-ref).


### Security
 
- MUST follow [BCP-003-003](#bcp-003-03-ref) for authorization of access to the EDID-CM Control and associated API.

- SHOULD follow [BCP-003](#bcm-003-ref) fully for Security. 
     

## Informative References

<a id="ipmx-ref"></a> 
[IPMX] "AIMS IPMX Open Standard Set" <https://ipmx.io/about/>.


<a id="bcp-3-ref"></a> 
[AMWA BCP-003]  "AMWA BCP-003 NMOS API Security Recommendations", <https://github.com/AMWA-TV/nmos-api-security>.


<a id="edid-cm-arch-ref"></a> 
[EDID-CM-ARCH]  "EDID Connection Management Architecure", December 2020, <https://specs.amwa.tv/nmos-edid-connection-management/branches/v1.0-devdocs/1.0._Architecture.html>.

             
## Normative References


<a id="nmos-cap-ref"></a>
[NMOS-CAP-REG]  "NMOS Capabilities Registry Parameters",2021, < https://github.com/AMWA-TV/nmos-parameter-registers/tree/capabilities/capabilities>.


<a id="is-edid-cm-ref"></a>
[IS-EDID-CM]  "EDID Device Control", March 2021,< https://specs.amwa.tv/nmos-edid-connection-management/branches/publish-tentative-raml/APIs/IPMXAPI.html>.


<a id="rfc2119-ref"></a>
[RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997, <https://tools.ietf.org/html/bcp14>.

<a id="bcp-003-ref"></a>
[BCP-003] "AMWA BCP-003 Security recommendations for NMOS APIs"  BCP-003-03,<https://specs.amwa.tv/bcp-003/>.

<a id="bcp-003-03-ref"></a>
[BCP-003-03] "NMOS Certificate Provisioning Best Current Practices"  BCP-003-03,<https://specs.amwa.tv/bcp-003-03/>.

<a id="jpeg-xs-ref"></a>
[JPEG-XS] "RTP Payload Format for ISO/IEC 21122 (JPEG XS)",  <https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-payload-rtp-jpegxs-08>.

<a id="bcp-004-01-ref"></a>
[BCP-004-01] "NMOS Receiver Capabilities Best Current Practices"  BCP-004-01,<https://specs.amwa.tv/bcp-004-01/>.

<a id="edid-ref"></a>
[E-EDID] "Extended EDID Version 1.4",E-EDID-01-04, Available from VESA, <https://vesa.org/vesa-standards/>.

<a id="is-04-ref"></a>
[IS-04] "AMWA IS-04 NMOS Discovery and Registration Specification", <https://specs.amwa.tv/is-04/>.

<a id="is-05-ref"></a>
[IS-05] "AMWA IS-05 NMOS Device Connection Management Specification", <https://specs.amwa.tv/is-05/>.
