# AMWA BCP-XXX-YY: EDID to NMOS Receiver Caps Mapping

## Background

Extended Display Identification Data (EDID) is a metadata format for sink devices to describe their capabilities to a video source (e.g. graphics card or set-top box). The data format is defined by a standard published by the Video Electronics Standards Association (VESA). This document is targeted against [E-EDID A2][E-EDID] files which consist of EDID 1.4 which is called Base EDID and an optional [CTA-861-G][CTA-861] Extension Block.

❓ Is `E-EDID A2` Too high of a reference point? Popular for HDMI monitors is EDID 1.3, use `E-EDID A1` aim for higher interoptability?
✔️ CEA/CTA-861-G

[AMWA BCP-004-01][BCP-004-01] describes a methodology for a similar purpose in relationship to [AMWA IS-04][IS-04].

## Scope

- HDMI 1.3 with extensions
- DP 1.4

This document provides Best Current Practice guidelines for how to implement a mapping of EDID fields to Receiver Capabilities in order to have a specific way of representing an EDID sink devices through an associated IS-04 Receiver.

## Use of Normative Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119][RFC-2119].

## Definitions

_See also the [NMOS Glossary](https://specs.amwa.tv/nmos/branches/main/docs/4.0._Glossary.html), and definitions within RFCs._

### Gateway Device

A device which encapsulates a digital video or/and audio signal (usually, from a physical connection) into IP packets. Conversely, the device may perform the reverse operation for IP packets to a digital signal.

### Sink

A media consuming unit associated with an IS-04 Receiver.

## Video Receivers

If an IS-04 Video Receiver is associated with a Sink which has EDID, its video capabilities MUST be mapped into Receiver's Capabilities accordingly to the rules below.

If the Sink acts as a Gateway Device, it's supposed to expose its own EDID and therefore Receiver Capabilities and not take into account EDIDs of Sinks connected to the Gateway in a non-networked way. :eyes:

### Video timings

Video timings, described in E-EDID, provide information about video frame size and rate.

Each video timing MUST be present in Receiver Capabilities as a Constraint Set with non-empty `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:frame_width`, `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:frame_height` and `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:grain_rate` fields. There are multiple E-EDID blocks which keep information about timings each with their own mapping requirements.

#### Established Timings

There are three sets of timings of this type: Established Timings I, II & III. The first two types are defined in [E-EDID][E-EDID] section 3.8, the last - in [E-EDID][E-EDID] section 3.10.3.9.

Each Established Timing is an ID associated with a union of frame width, height and rate and interlace mode, and the mentioned sections define this mapping.

↙️ I & II match from A2 Table 3.18 to A1 Table 3.14

#### Standard Timings

Standard Timing format is defined in [E-EDID][E-EDID] section 3.9.

❓ Do we need to spec the formula or just reference the spec?

Frame width MUST be calculated using the following formula: Frame width = (1B + 31) × 8, where 1B is the 1st byte of a Standard Timing. It MUST go into `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:frame_width`.

Frame height MUST be calculated using the following formula: Frame height = FW / IAR, where FW is Frame width and IAR is _Image Aspect Ratio_, and go into `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:frame_height`.

Frame rate is named _Field Refresh Rate_ there and MUST go into `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:grain_rate`.

#### 18 Byte Descriptors (Detailed Timing Descriptors)

Detailed Timing Descriptor is defined in [E-EDID][E-EDID] section 3.10.2.

Frame width is named _Horizontal Addressable Video in pixels_ there and MUST go into `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:frame_width`.

Frame height is named _Vertical Addressable Video in lines_ there and MUST go into `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:frame_height`. If timing is interlaced, then _Vertical Addressable Video in lines_ MUST be multiplied by 2.

Frame rate MUST be calculated using the following formula: Frame rate = PC × 10,000 / ((HAV + HB) × (VAV + VB)), where PC is _Pixel Clock_, HAV - _Horizontal Addressable Video in pixels_, HB - _Horizontal Blanking in pixels_, VAV - _Vertical Addressable Video in lines_ and VB - _Vertical Blanking in lines_. If a fraction, MUST be rounded to 2 significant digits after the point and go into `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:grain_rate`.

Interlace mode is named _Signal Interface Type_ there and MUST go into `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:interlace_mode`.

#### 3 Byte CVT Codes

3 Byte CVT Code structure is defined in [E-EDID][E-EDID] section 3.10.3.8.

Frame height MUST be calculated using the following formula: Frame height = (12BV + 1) × 2, where 12BV is the 12 bit value of a CVT Code. It MUST go into `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:frame_height`.

Frame width MUST be calculated using the following formula: Frame width = 8 × ROUNDDOWN(FH × AR / 8) where FH is Frame Height, AR is _Aspect Ratio_ and ROUNDDOWN is rounding down to the nearest integer. It MUST go into `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:frame_width`.

_Preferred Vertical Rate_ united with the frame width and height makes a Constraint Set.

Each _Supported Vertical Rate_ except the same value as _Preferred Vertical Rate_ MUST be extracted to a new Constraint Set with the same frame width and height.

#### Video Data Block

Video Data Block is defined in [CTA-861][CTA-861] section 7.5.1.

It operates with Video Identification Codes (VICs), each of them is associated with a union of frame width, height and rate and interlace mode. This mapping is defined in [CTA-861][CTA-861] section 4.1.

❓ This is spec'ed against EDID 1.3, we require 1.4

### Color subsampling

If EDID doesn't have the [CTA-861][CTA-861] Extension Block, color subsampling formats MUST be taken from Base EDID, otherwise from the Extenstion Block.

#### Base EDID

The origin of supported color subsampling formats in Base EDID is the Feature Support byte ([E-EDID A2][E-EDID] section 3.6.4). 

❓ In clear how to perform this translation
↙️ Section 3.7 in E-EDID A1

It has one of four possible values:
* RGB 4:4:4
* RGB 4:4:4 & YCbCr 4:4:4
* RGB 4:4:4 & YCbCr 4:2:2
* RGB 4:4:4 & YCbCr 4:4:4 & YCbCr 4:2:2

This value MUST be transformed into `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:color_sampling` with `enum` type value and added to each Constraint Set.

#### CTA-861 Extension Block

The origin of supported color subsampling formats in CTA-861 is CTA Extension Header ([CTA-861][CTA-861] section 7.5). Bits 4 and 5 of byte 3 show whether Sink supports YCbCr 4:2:2 and YCbCr 4:4:4 respectively in addition to RGB.

YCbCr 4:2:0 Capability Map Data Block ([CTA-861][CTA-861] section 7.5.11) shows which timings support YCbCr 4:2:0 in addition to subsampling formats listed in CTA Extension Header.

These values MUST be transformed into `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:color_sampling` with `enum` type value and added to each Constraint Set.

YCbCr 4:2:0 Video Data Block ([CTA-861][CTA-861] section 7.5.10) marks timings as supporting only YCbCr 4:2:0.

Constraint Set associated with these timings MUST have `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:color_sampling` equal to `YCbCr-4:2:0`.

### Preference order

If CTA-861 Extension Block is present and contains Video Format Preference Data Block (see [CTA-861][CTA-861] section 7.5.12), it MUST be used to fill `urn:x-nmos:cap:meta:preference`.

Otherwise, the following preference order should be used:
1. The 1st Detailed Timing Descriptor (Preferred Timing Mode).
2. Other Detailed Timing Descriptors in the order listed in Base EDID.
3. Any additional Detailed Timing Descriptors (priority is in the order listed) in CTA-861 Extension.
4. Short Video Descriptors in the order listed in CTA-861.
5. Any optional 3 Byte CVT Codes listed in Base EDID. Constraint Sets with _Preferred Vertical Rate_ MUST go first, then the rest in the order of descence of frame rate.
6. Standard Timings listed in Base EDID.
7. Established Timings listed in Base EDID.

## Audio Receivers

If Basic Audio support bit is active in CTA Extension Header, audio receiver MUST have Receiver Caps.

If there is no any Short Audio Descriptors (see [CTA-861][CTA-861] section 7.5.2), it means 2-channel Linear PCM audio with 8 bit depth, so `caps` attribute of `media_type` MUST contain only `audio/L8`, `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:media_type` MUST be equal to `audio/L8` and `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:channel_count` MUST be equal to 2.

If there are SADs, then each of them MUST be transformed into a Constraint Set.

_Audio Format Code_ of each Short Audio Descriptor MUST be transformed into an IANA media type if possible, added to `caps` of `media_types` and `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:media_type` of the new Constraint Set. ❓ is this obvious or trivial?

For Linear PCM format bit depth MUST be read from the third SAD byte and used for building the IANA media type.

Number of channels MUST go to `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:channel_count`.

All sampling frequencies MUST go to `urn:x-nmos:cap:format:sample_rate` as `enum`.


[RFC-2119]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119 "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels"
[IS-04]: https://specs.amwa.tv/is-04/ "AMWA IS-04 NMOS Discovery and Registration Specification (Stable)"
[BCP-004-01]: https://specs.amwa.tv/bcp-004-01/ "NMOS Receiver Capabilities"
[E-EDID]: https://vesa.org/vesa-standards/ "VESA Enhanced Extended Display Identification Data Standard Release A, Revision 2"
[CTA-861]: https://shop.cta.tech/products/a-dtv-profile-for-uncompressed-high-speed-digital-interfaces-cta-861-g "A DTV Profile for Uncompressed High Speed Digital Interfaces (CTA-861-G)"


--> asci hex folds the raw binary
--> it's not realistic to have the TX taking an `media-essentials` to an EDID
