# Introduction

The purpose of this document is to explain how Sources, Flows and Senders within an NMOS compatible system can be reconfigured and EDIDs of Sinks associated with Receivers can be obtained.

The terms ‘Device’, ‘Source’, ‘Flow’, ‘Sender’, ‘Receiver’ and ‘Sink’ will be used extensively throughout this document. Please refer to the core NMOS Technical Overview and Definition section for definitions of these.

This API is intended to be used in conjunction with an NMOS IS-04 Discovery & Registration and NMOS IS-05 Connection Management deployment.

# Definitions

## Sink

A media consuming unit associated with an IS-04 Receiver. Sink is a resource and based on Resource Core JSON Schema.

## Media Profile

Media description which describes a format acceptable for all Receivers implied to be a part of a connection. A Media Profile consist of separate parameters required to set up Sender and such IS-04 resources behind it as Source and Flow.

# API Structure

The API provides a mechanism to change the settings associated with logical Sources, Flows and Senders. Another use case is obtaining information about Sinks associated with Receivers.

## Senders

`/media-profiles` allows to pass an array of Media Profiles to a Sender and let a third-party which controls it choose what exact format to use. Also an API user can pass a single Media Profile to specify exact format strictly.

## Receivers

`/sinks` allows to list IDs of Sinks associated with a specific Receiver.

## Sinks

`/sinks/{sinkId}` provides Sink resource for an API user. A Sink consists of Resource Core and EDID parsed into JSON.

The API also allows to download binary EDID using `/sinks/{sinkId}/edid` if it exists.
